# The decomposition of zam

**Author**: Thomas Josefczak
**Date**: 2026-03-28

## A common personal and a private personal repository and cloud database
The github.com/zam-os/zam repository is only the **core** of the operating system and learning kernel. It shouldn't work stand alone. Even though the phase 1 prototype works inside the zam repo, it is meant to be split into a personal repo and the core.
For a minimal definition, how such a **personal** repo should look like, the github.com/zam-os/zam-personal (or similar - if a better name exists) will be created. I will then fork this into my **private personal** repo in github.com/Josefczak/zam-Thomas.
With the creation of zam-personal, some files of zam will be moved over. Starting zam needs to go there. This repo will be forked. In the end everyone starts zam from his or her personal repo. This repo contains the individual world view of the person, the beliefs. It also collects the top level goals. Lower level goals are rather tasks, which can be managed via a connector.
Each community scale maintains common beliefs. They are grounded in globally accepted concepts. All this can change and this might be an event, which would take time to process. The personal beliefs have to be adapted. All this could happen during conversation with the zam agent. It will maintain and propose changes to beliefs. "Did I get this right? You now believe the earth is a ball and there is no conspiracy about this fact.". The goals will also be maintained as markdowns by the zam agent. All ground breaking changes have to be committed and pushed. No policies required. The commits document approval. The learning tokens and cards and every other quickly changing thing which we want to persist, live in the database. An easy setup will migrate the local db to a cloud provider of choice. We can start with Turso.

## Connectors
Services are provided in an easy to access way. You need an endpoint and credentials. Zam agent will learn to use any kind of service.
In phase 1 - this is the most important resource we have to introduce, the management of subscriptions to services. This allows zam to access emails and other communication vehicles. It replaces old style dust collecting file cabinets, most individuals have to maintain to file documents. Document management providers like **DocuWare** my source of income can be linked here as a provider. In a simple form, Google Drive, Microsoft OneDrive, DropBox, Apple iCloud etc. would do.
You can imagine any kind of connector for any useful purpose. Food delivery services etc.. It will help you to achieve the goals you have defined. Task management is important for zam to work friction-less. A persisted task prevents that something gets lost. Tasks are the best source for learning oportunities. Thus we need to spend more time for the integration of task connectors. Tasks are short term goals. If the service is capable enough, like Azure DevOps, it can easily keep all goals for all members of an organization with different hierarchies. (GitHub Projects, Jira, etc.) When the learning session starts, also the current active tasks have to be checked. It is better to first finish an active task than adding new tasks and causing starvation of active tasks. The zam session should should spend up to 20 minutes to simply talk to repeat things which are difficult to put into a task execution with observation. Of course the user can abort this first repetition phase and go to task execution. Doing the daily job - but also learning with it. New learn tokens will be filed and some interactivity happens. The user can be observed doing the task - until it is clear, that parts of it are stable enough knowledge for automation. By observation, skills can be defined, which collect the out of the ordinary things, like creating a PBI in Azure DevOps which fills an alternative description field. If the agent would create such a work item with a standard description field, this would be invisible. So - not every click and mouse move is interesting, always skills should be as small as possible to be as flexible as possible.

## Outlook - not part of the increment 
### Phase 2
Community structures in zam will be distributed over common types, important to be provided as a first template.
The **zam-family** works similar to the personal repo. It adds goals and belief finding techniques. Family goals and beliefs are the foundation which tie the loving family together. Tasks handling and resource management needs to be linked here too. This might be the same as the personal connector.
The zam-family doesn't require the knowledge base. It only needs to link all members. So the knowledge of the family comprises of the knowledge of each member. 
Another useful structure could be **zam-community** for voluntary, non-paid and possibly short living communities.
A **zam-employer** has the responsibility to give a fair salary to the employees. The main purpose for a zam user to be connected to the employer is the safety to have a guaranteed minimum income. The employee therefore agrees to work on the tasks, the company goals and the people in the organization dictate. Furthermore it behaves the same as a zam-community. Thus it is provider for growth potentials.

### Phase 3 Deployable App
At the moment we need to pull the core repo with its base skills to run the symbiotic learning agent. This will change and it is distributed in another way - like e.g. a package management deployment - like **winget install zam-os/zam**. It will use a cloud provider. In phase 1 and 2, the cloud provider is github. The source of truth is maintained in markdowns and software. In phase 3 we will have easy to deploy products. I would start with three big ones - Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud Platform and Amazon Web Services. Others will adapt it easily. 
To define how the hosting layer works, we should have a separate project called zam-os/zam-provider. This project keeps all the principles and compatibility definitions for the different providers. A **provider** will abstract GitHub repositories away. The provider sells the hosting and connected services, like the AI model usage as an easy to subscribe product - for a reasonable amount of money. A zam provider donates 10% of the profit to the **zam foundation**, which reinvests it in maintenance and development ot the commons. 